Hey everyone,
welcome to the election data project.
So this project, similarly to the last
one, I'll be hopping back and
forth a bit between the IPython
notebook that's already completed for
you, and the live code section.
So if we take a look at the IPython
notebook, let's go ahead and
just look through the introduction.
So in this project we'll
be analyzing two data sets.
The first data set's gonna be
the results of some political polls, and
we'll analyze this aggregated poll
data and answer some questions.
Some of the questions we're gonna be
looking at was who was being polled and
what was their party affiliation.
We will also look at the poll results and
look at who they favored
either Mitt Romney or Obama.
Remember, this is the 2012 election.
We'll look at how undecided
voters affected the poll.
And can we account for
the undecided voters?
Maybe we could split them down
the middle and give half to Obama and
half to Romney and
see how that affects things.
Then, we'll look at how voter
sentiment changed over time.
And we'll also see if there's an affect
on the poles from the debates.
We'll discuss the second data later on.
Second data set's just gonna
be some donation data.
So let's go ahead and
start our first standard imports.
Gonna hop back over to the live coding, so
you guys can follow along with me here.
So first, we're gonna import
the things we need for data analysis.
So import pandas as pd.
From pandas import
Series, DataFrame and
then import numpy as np,
go ahead and run that.
Next we'll import the things we need for
visualization.
So I'll import matplotlib.pyplot as plt.
Then I'll import seaborn as sns.
Then again,
just like we did in the last project,
I'm gonna set the style to white grid,
just so
we see a nice white grid background
on all our visualizations.
Finally, remember to do
a matplotlib inline so
you can see the plots inline
in your IPython notebook.
For Python 2 users,
we're gonna wanna import from the future.
Import division.
If you're using Python 3,
you don't have to worry about this,
this is just taking care
of floating point numbers.
So we're also gonna be using two different
modules that we've kind of briefly gone
over one of them before, and
the other one might be completely new.
So let's hop over back
to the IPython Notebook.
So just some information
on the data itself.
The data for the polls, we obtained
it from the Huff Post Pollster.
So we can go ahead and
check out their website,
there's a link in the IPython Notebook.
It's actually a pretty cool website.
There's some awesome data visualization
and data sets to play with, here.
So, I encourage you to go ahead and
check out their websites and
the different data sets they have.
So, for our particular data set,
we're gonna be using the request module
to import some data from the web.
If you're interested in requests and
how it works, you can go ahead and
check out the documentation, there's
a link here in the IPython notebook,
but basically what request does
is just a really nice API for
gathering information from the web.
And then the other module we'll be using,
which you've actually seen once before
in this course, is the StringIO module,
and the StringIO module is gonna allow us
to basically give us a convenient means of
working with the text and
memory using the files API.
It's gonna help us read the file
into a Pandas data frame.
If you're interested more in the StringIO
and how it works, you can click this link
here and this link will take you
to this python module of the week
website where it's, basically what this
guy does, it's a pretty cool website.
I encourage you to check out the website
in general, but he goes over just a bunch
of different modules in Python and
then breaks them down and explains them.
So I encourage you to check out his
explanation of StringIO in case you're
interested further into it.
And with that being said,
let's go ahead and
hop back over to the Live code section.
So in order to grab web data,
we will import requests, and
then we're gonna import StringIO.
And what we'll actually have to do is
say from StringIO import StringIO, so
we can use that method.
Great.
So, what else are we gonna do?
We are going to grab the data from
the URL, so let's hop back over here.
So, this is the URL link for
the poll data.
I'm just gonna go ahead and copy paste it.
I encourage you to do the same so
I don't have to type this whole thing out.
But I'm gonna set an object called URL
equal to that website in a string.
So it's just
elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/201-
2-general-election-romney-vs-obama.
So that's the URL.
And then what I'm gonna do is use requests
to get the information in text form.
So I'll label source =
requests.get(url) and
then I'm gonna call
the text method on that.
So what this is doing is I'm using
requests to get the information off
this URL, and I'm informing it to read it
as a text file, since it's a .csv file.
And then I'll set that
as the object source.
And then I'll poll_data object =
StringIO A function on to that source.
So this is gonna help us avoid
a StringIO error with Pandas.
So once you've done all that,
if you have a slow internet connection
it might take a little bit, but
the file's not super large, so Python just
straight up grabbing it from the Internet.
Now that we have our data, we can go
ahead and set it as a data frame.
So I'm gonna say pull_df.
That's gonna be my data frame for this.
And I'll say, pd.read_csv,
since it's a CSV file, and
I'll read that poll data object.
And then once I've done that,
let's go ahead and
take a quick glimpse at what
this data frame looks like.
So first thing I'm gonna do is
just call the info method on it.
So I can get some basic information.
Looks like it's a total 14 columns,
589 rows for most of them.
And if we wanna actually
see what it looks like,
we can say poll_df.head to
preview the data frame.
So, first column we get the pollster,
so who was doing the polls, the start,
the end dates of the polls,
second and third column.
The entry dates, then the number of
observations, who the population was,
how they did the poll itself,
either for phone,
Internet, etcetera, and then if we
scroll along to the right a bit,
we can see what percentage of people
wanted to vote for Obama, what percentage
of people wanted to vote for Romney and
then who was still undecided.
And there's a URL for either the source or
the pollster themselves in case you
want to check out that on your own.
Great.
So let's continue on now that
we've see the data frame.
Let's just get a quick visualization
overview of the affiliation for the polls.
If you notice, there was a,
let me scroll to the right.
If you scroll all the way to the right,
you'll see if
the polls are partisan and if the pulls
themselves have an affiliation.
So for instance, this poll had
a Republican affiliation to it.
So we can do a quick
visualization using Seaborn using
sns.factorplot as we've done in the past.
In this case,
I will call that affiliation Column.
And then remember have to
set what my data's equal to.
I'll just set the equal to
the poll_df data frame.
So, let's go ahead and
see what's going on here in the polls.
It looks like most of the polls have
no affiliation which is good and
there is quite a large amount of polls
that have a Democrat affiliation,
so it's gonna be important to keep that in
mind as we look at the aggregate of data
of all of these polls, because
there's quite a bit more polls that
are affiliated with the Democrats
than with the Republicans.
But overall there's definitely a strong
neutrality to these polls, but
we're still leaning towards Democrats
in the aggregation of all of them.
It's good to keep that in mind.
Let's go ahead and continue some
visualization insights, by saying
we'll call a factor plot
on the affiliation again.
Set my data equal poll_df and
in this case, I'm gonna set my hue
equal to the population column.
Now what the population
column was in my data frame,
it separated the populations into four
categories, adults, likely voters,
likely voters who were Republican,
and then registered voters.
So if I run this, I can now see between
the affiliations who were likely voters,
who were registered voters, and who
were likely voters that were Republican,
as well as just people labeled adults who
didn't fit the other three categories.
So you can go ahead and see that there's
a strong showing of likely voters and
registered voters.
So the poll data should hopefully be a
good reflection on the populations polled.
And let's go ahead and get back to
a quick view of the DataFrame, so
we can remember what it looks like and
where we are.
Okay.
Great.
So what we can do is just take
a look at the averages for
Obama, Romney, and
the polled people who remained undecided.
And the way we can do that is
through a bit of a process,
so I'll walk you through it.
First we're gonna get the average, so
I'm gonna say an object called avg is
equal to pd.DataFrame and then I will
pass the mean through that and
I'll break that one I'm doing in a second.
Then I'll take that average object and
I will drop the number of observations.
And set that axis equal to zero.
And I'll set in place equal to true.
So it affects the actual data frame.
That u should not have been capitalized.
I apologize.
Okay.
So what did I do here?
Basically, I made an object
called average and
I did that by getting the current
data frame we're using, the poll_df,
taking the average of the all
values there, and then, I just
wanted to drop the number of observations
column, and I set inplace equal to True.
Great.
So if you're wondering why I did that,
I'll show you.
So what I'll do is I'll run
that with the second command.
Commented out.
Show you what the average would look like.
If you noticed here, this is what it
looks like before I drop the number of
observations, that DataFrame,
what the original DataFrame means.
But if you think about it,
I don't really care about
the average number of observations.
I just care about the average percentage
values between Obama, Romney and
Undecided.
So that's why I dropped the number of
observations off that averaged data frame.
Great.
So now that we have our averages,
let's go ahead and
get our standard deviations
using a very similar method.
I'll set std = pd.Data DataFrame
(poll_df.std()), and
then just like in the last data frame
I'm gonna drop the number
number of observations row.
So it's a row that's why I'm setting
my access equal to zero, and
then I will set in place equal to True.
And again I have misspelled
number of observations, plural.
Okay.
And then let's go ahead and
see what std looks like.
And there we have the standard
deviations for the averages.
[INAUDIBLE] Great.
So we can now plot using
Panda's built in plot.
And the way I can do that
is by saying my average.
I'm gonna plot my average data frame.
And I can set my y error to be equal to
the standard deviations
dataframe that we just made.
And I can do that by saying yerr, so
y error, is what it stands for,
equal to std, that data frame we made.
This is gonna be a bar graph, or bar plot.
And then what we're gonna do is
set the legend equal to false.
And there you have it.
So what is this?
This the average sentiment
of all the polls.
So on average Obama had somewhere
around looks like 47-ish.
Romney had a little less.
They're both within their standard
deviations of each other, so
they're both really close.
So it looks like the undecided here could
make a big difference as far as this poll
data is showing us.
So, since we're kinda interested in
seeing how close these pulls seem to be,
let's go ahead and
consider the undecided factor.
So let's take a look at those numbers.
And the way I'm gonna do that is by making
a new dataframe called pole_avg.
And I will construct it by concatenating
the two data frames we just made.
Along their column axis.
Let's go ahead and
see what that looked like.
So hopefully this is what you expected.
Basically, first column is the averages,
the second column is
the standard deviations.
Let's go ahead and name that, so
I'll do it in that same cell.
I'll say columns is equal to average.
Second column, standard deviation.
And now, if we look at that same
data frame, it's labeled for us.
Perfect.
So it looks like the poll indicates
it's a fairly close race, but
what about the undecided voters?
Most of them are likely to vote for
one of the candidates.
It's really unlikely that they don't
vote at all if they're that undecided.
So, if we assume the split occurred
evenly between the two candidates,
the observed difference should be an
unbiased estimate of the real difference.
So, let's go ahead and try that out.
And we'll do that in the next video.
So I'll see you there.
Go ahead and see if you can think about
how you could take that into account, and
then we'll do it in the next video.
All right, thanks for watching and
I'll see you in the next video.